sandcreek001: "The Sand Creek Massacre" by Robert Lindneaux portrays his concept of the assault on the peaceful Cheyenne and Arapaho village by the U.S. Army.

History Colorado #46619



sandcreek002: Photographed in 1891 in Washington, D.C., Little Bear barely survived the Sand Creek Massacre. Note the federally-issued peace medal hanging from his neck. Library of Congress

National Anthropological Archives
Little Bear's story at the Sand Creek Massacre represents a unique firsthand account of the massacre. George Bent translated and penned his story around 1906 and mailed it to author/historian George Hyde.

I looked towards Fort Lyon Trail south of the village when I seen long black line. Then I knew soldiers were coming to attack the village.

I found my war bonnet, shield and my quiver full of arrows… While I was putting on my war bonnet and shield, bullets were hitting all around me and bullets were hitting the lodges like hard storm… On way up [Sand Creek] the feathers of my war bonnet were shot away and my shield was shot several times, but I did not get hit.

When I got to the bank of the creek I seen Big Head, Crow Neck, Cut Lip Bear, and Smoker, standing behind the bank so I joined them… We were west end of the village… Big Head and his party… ran west. I turned and went north as I seen big crowd [of Cheyenne] going that way. About 20 soldiers followed me. Big Head and his party were all killed over the hill…

I seen lots of women and children that had been killed. Some were not dead yet… After the fight was over I seen 2 or 3 soldiers together standing over the dead I suppose scalping them.

Bear Tongue and Yellow Woman, the parents of Little Bear survived the Sand Creek Massacre. Few details are known about Little Bear's grandparents ‐ other than their names, old Chief White Face Bull Sr. and Dog Woman.

In the years after Sand Creek, Little Bear had several wives – Gum Woman, Wild Cat Woman, Fish Woman and Blind Woman, who were sisters. Little Bear was 75 years old at the time of his death on January 20, 1917. Only one of his children lived to adulthood, a son named White Face Bull. White Face Bull passed away in 1948; he was survived by children Minnie Red Hat, May Hail, and Eddie Bull. A great grandson and a great great grandson of Little Bear have been keepers of the Cheyenne Medicine Arrows.


sandcreek003: On September 28, 1864 Cheyenne Chiefs Black Kettle and White Antelope, with other Cheyenne and Arapaho, met in council with Colorado Governor John Evans and Colonel John Chivington. Held at Camp Weld near Denver, Major Edward Wynkoop, commander at Fort Lyon arranged the council and anticipated peace.  Library of Congress

Camp Weld conference participants, September 28, 1864

The Fort Laramie Treaty of 1851 promised the Cheyennes and Arapahos that the territory between the Arkansas and Platte Rivers would be theirs forever. Forever lasted ten years—a new treaty negotiated at Fort Wise restricted the tribes to a small, remote reservation in south-central Colorado, far from gold country.  Some tribal leaders, including White Antelope (seated, far left) and Black Kettle (seated, third from the left) sought peace through diplomacy. Others—including members of the Cheyenne Dog Soldier warrior society—refused to sign. Unable to sway them at the Camp Weld conference, Territorial Governor John Evans ordered them back to the reservation on Sand Creek, promising protection. Then he raised a volunteer cavalry.
Sand Creek: The Letter and the Leaders
National Park Service
10/11/14
This article is part of a series by the National Park Service concerning the 150th Anniversary of the Sand Creek Massacre.
On June 27, 1864, Colorado Territorial Governor John Evans offered an opportunity for a ceasefire in the ongoing conflict with Plains Indians. He directed “friendly Indians [to] keep away from those who are at war, and go to places of safety.” In response, Cheyenne Chief Black Kettle sent a letter, which reached Major Wynkoop on September 6, writing, “All came to the conclusion to make peace with you… We have seven prisoners of yours which we are willing to give up.”
The mention of prisoners convinced Wynkoop to act. Departing Fort Lyon with 130 men, the Major found thousands of Cheyenne, Sioux and Arapaho near the Smoky Hill River. An apprehensive Wynkoop put his trust in Black Kettle. Negotiating release of four prisoners, Wynkoop noted, “I have the principal chiefs… with me, and propose starting immediately to Denver City.”
Wynkoop and the delegation arrived at Camp Weld outside of Denver in late September. Governor Evans begrudgingly agreed to meet the chiefs, stating, “So far as making a treaty now is concerned, we are in no condition to do it… My soldiers are preparing for the fight.” By contrast, Black Kettle was conciliatory, saying, “We have come with our eyes shut… like coming through the fire. All we ask is that we have peace…”
The Camp Weld Council is one of the most important events preceding the Sand Creek Massacre. The meeting played a role in the removal of Wynkoop from command at Fort Lyon and the selection of the Sand Creek camp by many Cheyenne and Arapaho as they awaited news of peace.

Read more at http://indiancountrytodaymedianetwork.com/2014/10/11/sand-creek-letter-and-leaders-157230

sandcreek004: Cheyenne Chief War Bonnet, pictured during a visit to President Abraham Lincoln, was slain at Sand Creek in 1864. Library of Congress

sandcreek005: A depiction of one scene at Sand Creek by witness Howling Wolf. Public domain

sandcreek006: Howling Wolf (Cheyenne: Ho-na-nist-to, 1849–July 5, 1927) was a Southern Cheyenne warrior who was a member of Black Kettle's band and was present at the Sand Creek Massacre in Colorado. After being imprisoned in the Fort Marion in Saint Augustine, Florida in 1875, Howling Wolf became a proficient artist in a style known as Ledger art for the accounting ledger books in which the drawings were done. Library of Congress

sandcreek007: Title: [Indian delegation in the White House Conservatory during the Civil War, with J.G. Nicolay, President Abraham Lincoln's secretary, standing in center back row ] / Brady, New York.
Creator(s): Brady, Mathew B., approximately 1823-1896, photographer
Date Created/Published: [1863 March 27]
Medium: 1 photographic print on carte de visite mount : albumen.
Summary: Photograph of the Southern Plains delegation, taken in the White House Conservatory on March 27, 1863. The interpreter William Simpson Smith and the agent Samuel G. Colley are standing at the left of the group; the white woman standing at the far right is often identified as Mary Todd Lincoln. The Indians in the front row are, left to right: War Bonnet, Standing in the Water, and Lean Bear of the Cheyennes, and Yellow Wolf of the Kiowas. Yellow Wolf is wearing the Thomas Jefferson peace medal that aroused such interest. The identities of the Indians of the second row are unknown. Within eighteen months from the date of this sitting, all four men in the front row were dead. Yellow Wolf died of pneumonia a few days after the picture was taken; War Bonnet and Standing in the Water died in the Sand Creek Massacre; and Lean Bear was killed by toops from Colorado Territory who mistook him for a hostile. (Source: Diplomats in buckskin, by Herman J. Viola, p. 101).
Reproduction Number: LC-DIG-ppmsca-19914 (digital file from original) LC-USZ62-11880 (b&w film copy neg.)
Rights Advisory: No known restrictions on publication.
Call Number: LOT 12661, no. 3 [P&P]
Repository: Library of Congress Prints and Photographs Division Washington, D.C. 20540 USA http://hdl.loc.gov/loc.pnp/pp.print
Notes: 
